# Density-Based-Traffic-Signal-System

- The high volume of vehicles, the inadequate infrastructure and the irrational distribution of the development are main reasons for increasing traffic jam. The major cause leading to traffic congestion is the high number of vehicle which was caused by the population and the development of economy. Traffic congestion is a condition on road networks that occurs as use increases, and is characterized by slower speeds, longer trip times, and increased vehicular queuing.<br />
- When traffic demand is great enough that the interaction between vehicles slows the speed of the traffic stream, these results in some congestion .As demand approaches the capacity of a road (or of the intersections along the road), extreme traffic congestion sets in. When vehicles are fully stopped for periods of time, this is colloquially known as a traffic jam or traffic snarl-up. Traffic congestion can lead to drivers becoming frustrated and engaging in road rage. In order to avoid the congestion in the traffic. In traffic environments, Traffic Sign Recognition (TSR) is used to regulate traffic signs, warn the driver, and command or prohibit certain actions. A fast real-time and robust automatic traffic sign detection and recognition can support and disburden the driver, and thus, significantly increase driving safety and comfort.<br />
- The project is aimed at designing a density based traffic signal system where the timing of signal will change automatically on sensing the traffic density at any junction.
Traffic congestion is a major problem in most cities across the world and therefore it is time to make an automated system with decision making mechanism.
- Present day traffic signaling system is fixed time based which is not effective if one lane has more traffic than others. To fulfill this problem we have designed a concept of intelligent traffic control system. Sometimes higher traffic density at one side of the junction demands longer green time as compared to standard allotted time.
- We, therefore propose a mechanism in which the time period of green light and red light is assigned on the basis of the density of the traffic present at that time. This is achieved by using Infrared sensors.<br />
- Once the density is calculated, the glowing time of green light is assigned by the help of the microcontroller.<br />
- The sensors which are present on sides of the road will detect the presence of the vehicles and sends the information to the microcontroller where it will decide how long a the signal lights will remain green.
